# Validator

The Validator is a command line tool and collection of Java classes that can be used
to support validation.

Validator is implemented in the `com.ainq.izgateway.extract.Validator` class.

**New features are marked in bold**

## Usage
```
    $ java -jar extract-validator.jar [options]? [files] ...
```

### Conversion Options
The following options enable conversion to different file formats. NOTE: There is no
need to specify the input file format, as this is automatically detected.

-7[folder]
: Convert to HL7 Message Format to files in the specified output folder. The file
will be named the same as the input file, but will have the .hl7 extension.
To write the HL7 message to standard output, use -7-
To write the HL7 message to standard error output, use -7--

-c[folder]
: Convert to Tab Delimited Format to files in the specified output folder.  Uses .txt as the extension
and otherwise works like -7 above.

-b[folder]
: Convert to both HL7 Message and Tab Delimited format output files.

-n
: No conversions.

-i
: Convert all input records to the output, ignoring errors. Use with -b, -c, or -7 options above.
-I
: Convert only the inputs that are valid to the output (stop ignoring errors).

**-d**
: **Enable default value processing for HL7 Message Conversion**
: This option will replace values not provided in HL7 messages with UNK (or other
appropriate value) to report unknown values.

**-D**
: **Disable default value processing for HL7 Message Conversion**
: This option will not populate empty values in the message with UNK.

### Reporting Options

**-r[folder]**
: **Specify the folder where report files will be placed.  Uses .rpt as the extension**
**for report files in text format or .rpt.json in JSON format.**

**-j**
: **Write the report in JSON format suitable for use with other applications**

**-J**
: **Revert to reporting in text format (default behavior)**

-s[error code,...]|ALL
: Suppress validation for the specified errors (e.g., -sDATA001,DATA002)
: Use -sALL to supress all messages

-S[error code,...]|ALL
: Stop suppressing validation for the specified errors (e.g., -sDATA001,DATA002)


### Version Control

-v1
: Use Version 1 CVRS Validation Tables

-v2
: Use Version 2 CVRS Validation Tables

### Scripting and Debugging
The following options make it easy to quickly modify scripts to turn on/off
specific parts of the command line processing.

-e
: Exit, ignoring further command line arguments

-k
: Start a comment on the command line

-K
: End a comment

### Input Files
file ...
: One or more HL7 V2 VXU Message or Tab Delimited Files

: if file is -, the standard input will be validated. This enables Validator
to test output from another application when used with pipes on the command line.
```
   $ command-to-produce-extract | java -jar extract-validator.jar [options] -
```

: The type of file will automatically detected from its content.

: **CSV is now a supported input format.**  This was done to enable validation
of CSV files being contributed from various sources.  When the input format is CSV
dates in the MM/DD/YYYY format will be accepted as well as in YYYY-MM-DD format.

: Tab Delimited Files must conform to the CDC CVRS Tab Delimited Format

: HL7 VXU Message Files can contain a single HL7 V2 Message, multiple messages, and may
be formatted as an HL7 Batch using FHS, FTS, BHS and BTS Segments.

: Each HL7 V2 Segment must be terminated by a newline or carriage-return or
carriage-return/newline pair of characters.

: Messages in the file are delimited by HL7 Segments (MHS, FHS, BHS, BTS and BHS segments).
File and Batch Header and Trailer segments are ignored.

## Text Output
Output generated by this tool contains a detailed report followed by a summary report for each
file that is validated.

### Detailed Report
The detailed report is printed on the standard output stream.
```
File                             Vax_Event_Id     Line   Level  Field                    Error  Description
src\test\resour***102_01_COA.txt 1149755          1      ERROR  vtrcks_prov_pin          DATA005 vtrcks_prov_pin (1379) does not match the regular expression ^\d{6}?
src\test\resour***102_01_COA.txt 1149755          1      ERROR  admin_address_county     DATA007 admin_address_county (90035) is not in value set COUNTY[45001, 22001 ... 48507, 46137]
src\test\resour***102_01_COA.txt 1149755          1      ERROR  admin_address_county     BUSR002 admin_address_county (90035) does not match admin_address_state (CO) for Vaccine Administrator
src\test\resour***102_01_COA.txt 1149755          1      WARN   recip_address_zip        BUSR009 If recip_address_zip (80134) is present, recip_address_county () should be present for Recipient
	.
	.
	.
src\test\resour***102_01_COA.txt R9819            101    ERROR  recip_address_state      HL7_001 Message does not round trip at recip_address_state, '  ' != ''
src\test\resour***102_01_COA.txt R9820            102    ERROR  recip_address_state      DATA007 recip_address_state (  ) is not in value set STATE[AL, AK ... WI, WY]
src\test\resour***102_01_COA.txt R9820            102    ERROR  recip_race_1             REQD002 recip_race_1 is required for Refusal events
src\test\resour***102_01_COA.txt R9820            102    ERROR  recip_ethnicity          REQD002 recip_ethnicity is required for Refusal events
src\test\resour***102_01_COA.txt R9820            102    ERROR  admin_name               REQD002 admin_name is required for Refusal events
src\test\resour***102_01_COA.txt R9820            102    ERROR  admin_type               REQD002 admin_type is required for Refusal events
src\test\resour***102_01_COA.txt R9820            102    ERROR  admin_address_state      DATA007 admin_address_state (  ) is not in value set STATE[AL, AK ... WI, WY]
src\test\resour***102_01_COA.txt R9820            102    ERROR  recip_address_state      HL7_001 Message does not round trip at recip_address_state, '  ' != ''
src\test\resources\iis_example_files\20201102_01_COA.txt has 491 errors in 100 of 102 records.
```

The first line of the detail report are column headings describing the content.
* File - The name of the file being tested, with *** replacing middle characters for long file names
* Vax_Event_Id - The Value of the Vax_Event_Id associated with the record (may also be elided with ***)
* Line - The line number where the record was found (not counting the header row)
* Level - ERROR, WARN, or INFO to indicate the error severity. ERRORs must be fixed. WARN and INFO are advisory.
* Field - The field in error.  One of the CVRS Field names or ??? if a field name is unknown.
* Error - A 7 character error code identifying the type of error (See [Error Codes](#error-codes) below).
* Description - The complete text of the reported error message.

The last line of the detail report indicates the total number of errors found,
the total number of records with errors, and the total number of records read.

### Summary Report
The Summary report lists the error codes, field name, counts of errors, a
general description of the problem reported, and the line number and error message for
first example where the problem appears for that error and field combination.

```
Code    Field                   Count   Description                                         Example
BUSR001 recip_address_county       12   recip_address_county in recip_address_state FIPS         1 recip_address_county (49053) does not match recip_address_state (MI) for Recipient
BUSR002 admin_address_county        4   admin_address_county in admin_address_state FIPS         3 admin_address_county (49053) does not match admin_address_state (MI) for Vaccine Administrator
BUSR003 recip_address_zip           2   recip_address_zip in recip_address_state STATE          15 recip_address_zip (1529) does not match recip_address_state (MI) for Recipient
BUSR004 admin_address_zip           2   admin_address_zip in admin_address_state STATE          15 admin_address_zip (1529) does not match admin_address_state (MI) for Vaccine Administrator
BUSR005 recip_dob                   5   recip_dob < admin_date                                   2 recip_dob (2015-08-26) is after admin_date (10/24/2020)
BUSR007 recip_address_zip           1   recip_address_zip implies recip_address_state           18 If recip_address_zip (48504) is present, recip_address_state () should be present for Recipient
BUSR008 admin_address_zip           1   admin_address_zip implies admin_address_state           19 If admin_address_zip (49053) is present, admin_address_state () should be present for Vaccine Administrator
BUSR009 recip_address_zip           1   recip_address_zip implies recip_address_county          20 If recip_address_zip (49964) is present, recip_address_county () should be present for Recipient
BUSR010 admin_address_zip           2   admin_address_zip implies admin_address_county          20 If admin_address_zip (49053) is present, admin_address_county () should be present for Vaccine Administrator
BUSR011 recip_dob                   1   recip_dob no_time_travel                                22 If recip_dob (2032-11-01) is present it should be less than tomorrow (DON'T CARE)
BUSR012 admin_date                  3   admin_date no_time_travel                               22 If admin_date (2022-10-04) is present it should less than tomorrow (DON'T CARE)
DATA001 admin_date                  1   Date is not valid                                        2 admin_date (10/24/2020) contains an invalid date, should match yyyy-MM-dd
DATA001 recip_dob                   1   Date is not valid                                        1 recip_dob (2015-26-08) contains an invalid date, should match yyyy-MM-dd|yyyy-MM
DATA004 pprl_id                     1   Should not be present                                    6 pprl_id (Present) should not be present
```

## JSON Output
When used with the -j flag, output appears in JSON format.

This report includes the validated file name, details for each error, the total number
of errors found, the number of records with one or more errors, and the total number
of records read. If conversion is being perform, the number of tab-delimited CVRS records,
or the number of HL7 messages written are also provided.

A brief listing of the top level elements of the report are shown below:
```
{
    "filename": "src\\test\\resources\\testerror.txt",
    "detail": [ ... ],
    "totalErrors": 176,
    "failedRecords": 52,
    "totalRecords": 52,
    "cvrsWritten": 0,
    "hl7Written": 0,
    "summary": [ ... ]
}
```
### Detailed Report Items
Detail line items are provided in the "detail" entry above.
This is an array of records which contains one detail entry for each detected error.
Details include the vaccination event identifier, the line number where the error was
found, the error code, affected field, and error level, and the error message describing
the problem with value in error.

```
    {
        "vax_event_id": "DATA001_recip_dob",
        "line": 1,
        "code": "DATA001",
        "field": "recip_dob",
        "level": "ERROR",
        "message": "recip_dob (2015-26-08) contains an invalid date, should match yyyy-MM-dd|yyyy-MM"
    },
```

### Summary Report Items
Summary line items organize the detailed report sorted by error code and field in error,
and include the number of errors like this encountered in the file, a description
of the problem, and all examples of the data in error (enabling ready construction of
a collapsible view of the summary in HTML).

This is illustrated below.
```
    "summary": [
        {
            "code": "BUSR001",
            "field": "recip_address_county",
            "count": 2,
            "description": "recip_address_county in recip_address_state FIPS",
            "examples": [
                {
                    "line": 1,
                    "vax_event_id": "DATA001_recip_dob",
                    "message": "recip_address_county (49053) does not match recip_address_state (MI) for Recipient"
                },
                {
                    "line": 2,
                    "vax_event_id": "DATA001_admin_date_1",
                    "message": "recip_address_county (49053) does not match recip_address_state (MI) for Recipient"
                }
        }
    ]
```
## Error Codes
The sections below list the reported error codes and their meaning.
Other error codes indicate an abnormal condition (an uncaught exception) and given the exception name for the code.

### DATA Errors
DATA Error codes denote conditions where a field failed to meet data type validation criteria.

DATA001
: Invalid Date

DATA002
: Does not match an expected fixed value (not used for anything at this point)

DATA003
: Does not contain expected value from (D|I|P) (only used for ext_type)

DATA004
: Should not be present (applies to pprl_id)

DATA005
: Does not match expected format

DATA006
: Does not contain expected value (Redacted)

DATA007
: Is not in the expected Value Set

DATA008
: Field exceeds maximum length

DATA009
: Date is not correctly formatted

### Format Errors
**FMT_ Error codes indicate a problem in the file format.**

FMT_001
: File is not tab delimited.

The file is not tab delimited (may be a CSV file)

FMT_002
: Input contains invalid headers: [ admin_type]

One of the header fields is mispelled, invalid or contains spaces

FMT_003
: File is not a CVRS

File cannot be parsed in CVRS Format

### Missing Required data
REQD Error codes indicate that required data was not provided for an event (e.g., Vaccination, Refusal, Missed Appointment)

REQD001
: Required for Missed Appointment (not reported in V2)

REQD002
: Required for Refusal

REQD003
: Required for Vaccination


### Do Not Send Data
DNTS Error codes indicate that data was provided that was marked as do not send for an event.

DNTS001
: Do not send for Missed Appointment (not reported in V2)

DNTS002
: Do not send for Refusal

DNTS003
: Do not send for Vaccination (not used)


### Business Rule Validations
BUSR Error codes indicate that one or more cross-field business rules failed validation.

BUSR001
:  FIPS County and State code should match for recipient address.

BUSR002
:  FIPS County and State code should match for admin address.

BUSR003
:  ZIP Code and State code should match for recipient address.

BUSR004
:  ZIP Code and State code should match for admin address.

BUSR005
:  Date of birth should be less than administration date.

BUSR006
:  vax_refusal and recip_missed_appt cannot both be yes (not active in V2)

BUSR007
:  If a Zip code is present, county code should also be present for recipient address (this is a warning only)

BUSR008
:  If a Zip code is present, state should also be present for recipient address (this is a warning only)

BUSR009
:  If a Zip code is present, county code should also be present for admin address (this is a warning only)

BUSR010
:  If a Zip code is present, state should also be present for admin address (this is a warning only)

BUSR011
:  Recipient date of birth should be less than tomorrow's date.

BUSR012
:  Admin date should be less than tomorrow's date.

BUSR013
:  vax_event_id should not be duplicated in any batch.

### HL7 Conversion/Parsing Errors
HL7_ Error codes indicate that an error was detected converting to HL7 Format at the specified field.

HL7_001
: Message does not round trip. Content from Tab Delimited format converted to HL7 and back is not the same

HL7_003
: HL7 Parsing Error. Usually occurs on dates that are not formatted correctly

## Exit Codes
If all records validated successfully, the program will return an exit code of 0.
If one or more records had a validation error or warning, the program will return an exit code **indicating**
**the number of errors found**.
If an exception occurs that causes program termination, an exit code of < 1 will be returned to indicate
an execution error.

## Known Issues
1. Validator uses HL7 HAPI V2 for reading and converting HL7 V2 Messages. Those libraries rely upon SLF4J for logging.
While using these tools from the command line, you may see the following reported in the standard error stream:
```
SLF4J: Failed to load class "org.slf4j.impl.StaticLoggerBinder".
SLF4J: Defaulting to no-operation (NOP) logger implementation
SLF4J: See http://www.slf4j.org/codes.html#StaticLoggerBinder for further details.
```
This is completely harmless.  We have not selected a logger binding so that these tools may be used with
other services that will provide such a binding, without forcing users of this software to reconfigure
these tools for their environment.

2. CSV Conversion has not been fully tested.  Consider it to be an unsupported feature
   because the CRVS Extract is intended to be exchanged using tab-delimited format.
   See https://github.com/AudaciousInquiry/CDC_IIS_Open_Tools/issues/18

3. JSON output has not been fully tested.
   See https://github.com/AudaciousInquiry/CDC_IIS_Open_Tools/issues/19